notes.md, before:

npm init -y - install package.json

create index.js
- make it main: index.js , in package.json
 "main": "index.js"

 git init
- gives me a git ignore
or 
touch .gitignore

npm install express
npm i helmet // protects headers
npm i cors
npm install knex //install globally to use cli command line interface
npm install sqlite3 



npm i nodemon -D // could do global or dev
//scripts: node index.js // does not rerender when saved
scripts: "server":"nodemon index.js" //will rerender upon save<

----------------------------------------------------------------------

index.js

const server = require('./server')

const PORT = process.env.PORT || 4001;

server.listen(PORT, () => {
    console.log(`Listening on port ${PORT}...`)
})
------------------------------------------------------------------
api/server.js

const express = require('express')
const server = express()  //create instance of express server

server.use(express.json())// allows express to read .json from body of request

server.get('/', (req, res) => { res.status(200).json({hello: 'Web 23'})})

module.exports = server;
--------------------------------------
npm install knex

knex  init
// makes a knexfile.js

development: {
    client: "sqlite3",
    connection: {
      filename: "./data/land.sqlite3"
    },
    useNullAsDefault: true, //prevents bugs and issues

    migrations: {
      directory: "./data/migrations" //to put migrations under folder data
    },
    seeds: {
      directory: "./data/seeds"
    },
    // add the following
    pool: {
      afterCreate: (conn, done) => {
        // runs after a connection is made to the sqlite engine
        conn.run("PRAGMA foreign_keys = ON", done); // turn on Foreign Key enforcement
      }
    }
  },


--------------------------------------------------------
make a folder called data

Add: db-config.js
-used to connect to database

knex - enables you to access database and write sql statements using js

const knex = require('knex')

const config = require('../knexfile')

module.exports = knex(config.development)
----------------------------------------------------------

migration
knex migrate:make create-resources-table

Understand how to make tables and relationships

components 
-entities (nouns: zoo, animal, species), a resource --> tables
- properties --> columns or fields
- relationships --> Foreign Keys 

workflow
-identify entities
    projects
    technologies

-identify properties
    projects: 
        id - primary key - integer
        project - string .notNullable
        description - string
        date - default false

     tech:
        id - primary key - integer
        tech - string .notNullable

    techInProject:
        id - primary key - integer
        project_id foreign key
        tech_id foreign key
        

knex cheatsheet: https://devhints.io/knex

help to label seeds
http://knexjs.org/#Schema-defaultTo

knex migrate:latest

knex migrate:rollback //if want to undo latest

also see: http://knexjs.org/#Migrations

Changes and Rollbacks
If later down the road, we realize you need to update your schema, you shouldn’t edit the migration file. Instead, you will want to create a new migration with the command:

knex migrate:make projects-schema-update

change migration - http://perkframework.com/v1/guides/database-migrations-knex.html

if need to add a new column:
create new migration file.
only add additional column to table

postgres 

 staging: {
    client: "pg",
    connection: {
      host:'localhost',
      database: "landBE",
      user: "postgres",
      password: "5%G!fT",
      host:'localhost',
      port:5432,
    },
    pool: {  //# of connections between api and db server.  Db manager will decide
      min: 2,
      max: 10
    },
    migrations: {
      directory: "./data/migrations" //to put migrations under folder data
    },
    seeds: {
      directory: "./data/seeds"
    }
  },

run migrations in an environment aside from development:
knex migrate:latest --env production

Postgres from terminal:
psql -U postgres postgres
.......(user)..(database)

\?  list of commands
\q quit
\d relations

select * from tech;  (must end with ;)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
open in sqlite3

seeds 


knex seed:make 001-recipe

knex seed:run

const bcrypt = require('bcryptjs')
exports.seed = function(knex) {
  // Deletes ALL existing entries
  return knex('users').del()
    .then(function () {
      // Inserts seed entries
      return knex('users').insert([
        {username: 'Russ', password: bcrypt.hashSync('pass', 10)},
        {username: 'Mack', password: bcrypt.hashSync('pass', 10)},
        {username: 'Reed', password: bcrypt.hashSync('pass', 10)},
      ]);
    });
};
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
routes / models

make a folder
add files:

auth/auth-router.js
auth/restricted-middleware.js

users:
/users-helpers.js
/users-helpers.test.js
/users-model.js
/users-router.js

api:
/api-router.js
/middleware.js
-------------------------------------------------------

api:
/api-router.js
/middleware.js

//export / import router and middleware to server.js
//require project routers to server.js

npm i bcryptjs jsonwebtoken

const express = require('express')

const server = express()

//bring in routers
const authRouter = require('../auth/auth-router.js');
const usersRouter = require('../users/users-router.js');

//bring in middleware, then configure it to server
const configureMiddleware = require('./middleware')
configureMiddleware(server)

server.use('/api/auth', authRouter);
server.use('/api/users', usersRouter);

server.use('/', (req, res) => {
    {res.status(200).json('Its Alive')}
})

module.exports = server


----------------------------------------------------------------------
api-router

npm i bcrypt jsonwebtoken

const router = require('express').Router();
const bcrypt = require('bcryptjs'); //to hash
const jwt = require('jsonwebtoken') //token 
const Users = require('../users/users-model.js');

// for endpoints beginning with /api/auth
router.post('/register', (req, res) => {
    let user = req.body;
    //always validate data before sending to db
    const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(user.password, 10); // 2 ^ n
    user.password = hash;
  
    Users.add(user)
      .then(saved => {
        res.status(201).json(saved);
      })
      .catch(error => {
        res.status(500).json(error);
      });
  });
  
  router.post('/login', (req, res) => {
    let { username, password } = req.body;
  
    Users.findBy({ username })
      .first()
      .then(user => {
        if (user && bcrypt.compareSync(password, user.password)) {
          //produce token
          const token = generateToken(user.username)
          //send token to client
          res.status(200).json({
            message: `Welcome ${user.username}!`,
            token //send token to client
          });
        } else {
          res.status(401).json({ message: 'Invalid Credentials' });
        }
      })
      .catch(error => {
        res.status(500).json(error);
      });
  });
  
  function generateToken(username){
    const payload = {
        subject: user.id, //sub property in header
        username
        //additional data, do not include sensitve info
    }
    const secret = process.env.JWT_SECRET || "aslskek34l4kfnad"
    const options = {
        expiresIn : '8h'
    }
    return jwt.signed(payload, secret, options)
  }
  
  module.exports = router;




helper functions for sql
https://youtu.be/OFLPJfCNAS0
https://github.com/Surfsol/node-db3-challenge/blob/russell-terry/schemes/scheme-model.js


knex migrations: file representing changes to database

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
hash 
npm i bcryptjs
const bcrypt = require('bcryptjs')

 //hash the password using bcryptjs
    const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(password, 8);

 //check that password is valid
         if(user && bcrypt.compareSync(password, user.password))

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
protected route

token will be stored in localstorage, can do it on react


to test in insomina - add token without quotes to header
Authorization (token without quotes)

const jwtKey =
  process.env.JWT_SECRET ||
  "aslskek34l4kfnad";

// quickly see what this file exports
module.exports = {
  authenticate,
};

// implementation details
function authenticate(req, res, next) {
  const token = req.get('Authorization');

  if (token) {
    jwt.verify(token, jwtKey, (err, decoded) => {
      if (err) {
        return res.status(401).json({
            message: "Invalid Credentials"});
      } else {
        req.decoded = decoded;

        next();
        }
    })} else {
        return res.status(401).json({message: "No credentials provided"})
    }
}
---------------------------------------------------
add additional middleware, to access certain areas of site

example, add: role

1st. include role when token is generated

function getJwtToken(username) {
  const payload = {
    username,
    role: "student" // this will probably come from the database
  };

  const secret = process.env.JWT_SECRET || "is it secret, is it safe?";

  const options = {
    expiresIn: "1d"
  };

  return jwt.sign(payload, secret, options);
}

add role and as an additional piece of middleware

router.get('/', authenticate, role, (req, res) => {
    UsersModel.find()
    .then(users => {
        res.json(users)
    })
    .catch(err => res.send(err))
})


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------          
express-session
npm i express-session
- manages sessons

1. client sends credentials.
2. server verify credentials.
3. server creates a session for the client.
    - node, can use, either:
    express-session or client-sessions
    - data stored in memory is wiped when the server restarts.
4. server produces and sends back cookie.
     HTTP message. Every HTTP message, be it a request or a response, has two main parts: the headers and the body.
    HEAD
     - To send cookies the server will add the Set-Cookie header to the response like so: "Set-Cookie": "session=12345"
     - library for creating and sending cookies
    BODY
    -The body contains the data portion of the message
5. client stores the cookie.
6. client sends cookie on every request.
7. server verifies that cookie is valid.
8. server provides access to resource.

express-session - handle sessions
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
testing

validate data

business logic, something that makes your business unique.

validation is another layer, that should be isolated. Don't tie validation data to router or middleware. should be seperate.

users-helpers.js


 const { validateUser } = require("../users/users-helpers.js");

<!-- // for endpoints beginning with /api/auth
router.post('/register', (req, res) => {
    let user = req.body;
    console.log(user) -->
    //always validate data before sending to db
    const validateResult = validateUser(user);

    if (validateResult.isSuccessful === true){

    <!-- const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(user.password, 10); // 2 ^ n
    user.password = hash;
    console.log(`hash`, hash)
  
    Users.add(user)
      .then(saved => {
        res.status(201).json(saved);
      })
      .catch(err => {
        res.status(500).json(err);
      }); -->

    } else {
        res.status(400).json({
            message: 'Invalid info about user',
        errors: validateResult.errors})
    }
  });
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
test logic should never fail.
so use jest to test function, to make sure always working correctly
create: users-helpers.test.js  // must end in test.js or spec.js will be executed by jest

npm i jest -D

add to package.json

"test": "jest --watch" // continuously watch

"jest": {"testEnvironment": "node"}

write code to test our code

---------------------------------------------
heroku deployment 

1. index.js  - need dynamic port 
const PORT = process.env.PORT

2. package.json
'scripts'
"start":"node index.js"

3. model
 .insert(proj, 'id')//include id or * to return id

 4. add on to use Postgres
 Resources/ add-ons / Postgres - HobbyDev-Free - provision

 in settings/ config vars 
  will appear DATABASE_URL ->  postgres

modify knexfile:
production: {
    client: "pg",
    connection: process.env.DATABASE_URL,
    pool: {
      min: 2,
      max: 10
    },
    migrations: {
      tableName: "./data/seeds"
    }
  }

5. data/ db_Config
const dbEnv = process.env.DB_ENV || 'development'

module.exports = knex(config[dbEnv])

6. Heroku - add - Config Vars
DB_ENV production

7. add migrations and seeds
npx heroku run knex migrate:latest -a landingbe

npx heroku run knex migrate:up 20191225204850_staging.js -a landingbe

npx heroku run knex seed:run -a landingbe


exports.seed = function(knex) {
  // Deletes ALL existing entries
  return knex('techInProject').del()
    .then(function () {
      // Inserts seed entries
      return knex('techInProject').insert([
        {project_id: 1, tech_id: 1},
        {project_id: 2, tech_id: 2},
        {project_id: 3, tech_id: 3}
      ]);
    });
};

Commit message:

Add routes-models/mailer, replaced emails and Twilio phone with process.env, npm i nodemailer, add mailerRouter to server.js

notes.md, after:

npm init -y - install package.json

create index.js
- make it main: index.js , in package.json
 "main": "index.js"

 git init
- gives me a git ignore
or 
touch .gitignore

npm install express
npm i helmet // protects headers
npm i cors
npm install knex //install globally to use cli command line interface
npm install sqlite3 



npm i nodemon -D // could do global or dev
//scripts: node index.js // does not rerender when saved
scripts: "server":"nodemon index.js" //will rerender upon save<

----------------------------------------------------------------------

index.js

const server = require('./server')

const PORT = process.env.PORT || 4001;

server.listen(PORT, () => {
    console.log(`Listening on port ${PORT}...`)
})
------------------------------------------------------------------
api/server.js

const express = require('express')
const server = express()  //create instance of express server

server.use(express.json())// allows express to read .json from body of request

server.get('/', (req, res) => { res.status(200).json({hello: 'Web 23'})})

module.exports = server;
--------------------------------------
npm install knex

knex  init
// makes a knexfile.js

development: {
    client: "sqlite3",
    connection: {
      filename: "./data/land.sqlite3"
    },
    useNullAsDefault: true, //prevents bugs and issues

    migrations: {
      directory: "./data/migrations" //to put migrations under folder data
    },
    seeds: {
      directory: "./data/seeds"
    },
    // add the following
    pool: {
      afterCreate: (conn, done) => {
        // runs after a connection is made to the sqlite engine
        conn.run("PRAGMA foreign_keys = ON", done); // turn on Foreign Key enforcement
      }
    }
  },


--------------------------------------------------------
make a folder called data

Add: db-config.js
-used to connect to database

knex - enables you to access database and write sql statements using js

const knex = require('knex')

const config = require('../knexfile')

module.exports = knex(config.development)
----------------------------------------------------------

migration
knex migrate:make create-resources-table

Understand how to make tables and relationships

components 
-entities (nouns: zoo, animal, species), a resource --> tables
- properties --> columns or fields
- relationships --> Foreign Keys 

workflow
-identify entities
    projects
    technologies

-identify properties
    projects: 
        id - primary key - integer
        project - string .notNullable
        description - string
        date - default false

     tech:
        id - primary key - integer
        tech - string .notNullable

    techInProject:
        id - primary key - integer
        project_id foreign key
        tech_id foreign key
        

knex cheatsheet: https://devhints.io/knex

help to label seeds
http://knexjs.org/#Schema-defaultTo

knex migrate:latest

knex migrate:rollback //if want to undo latest

also see: http://knexjs.org/#Migrations

Changes and Rollbacks
If later down the road, we realize you need to update your schema, you shouldn’t edit the migration file. Instead, you will want to create a new migration with the command:

knex migrate:make projects-schema-update

change migration - http://perkframework.com/v1/guides/database-migrations-knex.html

if need to add a new column:
create new migration file.
only add additional column to table

postgres 

 staging: {
    client: "pg",
    connection: {
      host:'localhost',
      database: "landBE",
      user: "postgres",
      password: "5%G!fT",
      host:'localhost',
      port:5432,
    },
    pool: {  //# of connections between api and db server.  Db manager will decide
      min: 2,
      max: 10
    },
    migrations: {
      directory: "./data/migrations" //to put migrations under folder data
    },
    seeds: {
      directory: "./data/seeds"
    }
  },

run migrations in an environment aside from development:
knex migrate:latest --env production

Postgres from terminal:
psql -U postgres postgres
.......(user)..(database)

\?  list of commands
\q quit
\d relations

select * from tech;  (must end with ;)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
open in sqlite3

seeds 


knex seed:make 001-recipe

knex seed:run

const bcrypt = require('bcryptjs')
exports.seed = function(knex) {
  // Deletes ALL existing entries
  return knex('users').del()
    .then(function () {
      // Inserts seed entries
      return knex('users').insert([
        {username: 'Russ', password: bcrypt.hashSync('pass', 10)},
        {username: 'Mack', password: bcrypt.hashSync('pass', 10)},
        {username: 'Reed', password: bcrypt.hashSync('pass', 10)},
      ]);
    });
};
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
routes / models

make a folder
add files:

auth/auth-router.js
auth/restricted-middleware.js

users:
/users-helpers.js
/users-helpers.test.js
/users-model.js
/users-router.js

api:
/api-router.js
/middleware.js
-------------------------------------------------------

api:
/api-router.js
/middleware.js

//export / import router and middleware to server.js
//require project routers to server.js

npm i bcryptjs jsonwebtoken

const express = require('express')

------------------------------------------------------------
twilio
can not do a .post to twilio
need TWILIO ID AND AUTH in environmental variables

const server = express()

//bring in routers
const authRouter = require('../auth/auth-router.js');
const usersRouter = require('../users/users-router.js');

//bring in middleware, then configure it to server
const configureMiddleware = require('./middleware')
configureMiddleware(server)

server.use('/api/auth', authRouter);
server.use('/api/users', usersRouter);

server.use('/', (req, res) => {
    {res.status(200).json('Its Alive')}
})

module.exports = server


----------------------------------------------------------------------
api-router

npm i bcrypt jsonwebtoken

const router = require('express').Router();
const bcrypt = require('bcryptjs'); //to hash
const jwt = require('jsonwebtoken') //token 
const Users = require('../users/users-model.js');

// for endpoints beginning with /api/auth
router.post('/register', (req, res) => {
    let user = req.body;
    //always validate data before sending to db
    const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(user.password, 10); // 2 ^ n
    user.password = hash;
  
    Users.add(user)
      .then(saved => {
        res.status(201).json(saved);
      })
      .catch(error => {
        res.status(500).json(error);
      });
  });
  
  router.post('/login', (req, res) => {
    let { username, password } = req.body;
  
    Users.findBy({ username })
      .first()
      .then(user => {
        if (user && bcrypt.compareSync(password, user.password)) {
          //produce token
          const token = generateToken(user.username)
          //send token to client
          res.status(200).json({
            message: `Welcome ${user.username}!`,
            token //send token to client
          });
        } else {
          res.status(401).json({ message: 'Invalid Credentials' });
        }
      })
      .catch(error => {
        res.status(500).json(error);
      });
  });
  
  function generateToken(username){
    const payload = {
        subject: user.id, //sub property in header
        username
        //additional data, do not include sensitve info
    }
    const secret = process.env.JWT_SECRET || "aslskek34l4kfnad"
    const options = {
        expiresIn : '8h'
    }
    return jwt.signed(payload, secret, options)
  }
  
  module.exports = router;




helper functions for sql
https://youtu.be/OFLPJfCNAS0
https://github.com/Surfsol/node-db3-challenge/blob/russell-terry/schemes/scheme-model.js


knex migrations: file representing changes to database

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
hash 
npm i bcryptjs
const bcrypt = require('bcryptjs')

 //hash the password using bcryptjs
    const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(password, 8);

 //check that password is valid
         if(user && bcrypt.compareSync(password, user.password))

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
protected route

token will be stored in localstorage, can do it on react


to test in insomina - add token without quotes to header
Authorization (token without quotes)

const jwtKey =
  process.env.JWT_SECRET ||
  "aslskek34l4kfnad";

// quickly see what this file exports
module.exports = {
  authenticate,
};

// implementation details
function authenticate(req, res, next) {
  const token = req.get('Authorization');

  if (token) {
    jwt.verify(token, jwtKey, (err, decoded) => {
      if (err) {
        return res.status(401).json({
            message: "Invalid Credentials"});
      } else {
        req.decoded = decoded;

        next();
        }
    })} else {
        return res.status(401).json({message: "No credentials provided"})
    }
}
---------------------------------------------------
add additional middleware, to access certain areas of site

example, add: role

1st. include role when token is generated

function getJwtToken(username) {
  const payload = {
    username,
    role: "student" // this will probably come from the database
  };

  const secret = process.env.JWT_SECRET || "is it secret, is it safe?";

  const options = {
    expiresIn: "1d"
  };

  return jwt.sign(payload, secret, options);
}

add role and as an additional piece of middleware

router.get('/', authenticate, role, (req, res) => {
    UsersModel.find()
    .then(users => {
        res.json(users)
    })
    .catch(err => res.send(err))
})


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------          
express-session
npm i express-session
- manages sessons

1. client sends credentials.
2. server verify credentials.
3. server creates a session for the client.
    - node, can use, either:
    express-session or client-sessions
    - data stored in memory is wiped when the server restarts.
4. server produces and sends back cookie.
     HTTP message. Every HTTP message, be it a request or a response, has two main parts: the headers and the body.
    HEAD
     - To send cookies the server will add the Set-Cookie header to the response like so: "Set-Cookie": "session=12345"
     - library for creating and sending cookies
    BODY
    -The body contains the data portion of the message
5. client stores the cookie.
6. client sends cookie on every request.
7. server verifies that cookie is valid.
8. server provides access to resource.

express-session - handle sessions
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
testing

validate data

business logic, something that makes your business unique.

validation is another layer, that should be isolated. Don't tie validation data to router or middleware. should be seperate.

users-helpers.js


 const { validateUser } = require("../users/users-helpers.js");

<!-- // for endpoints beginning with /api/auth
router.post('/register', (req, res) => {
    let user = req.body;
    console.log(user) -->
    //always validate data before sending to db
    const validateResult = validateUser(user);

    if (validateResult.isSuccessful === true){

    <!-- const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(user.password, 10); // 2 ^ n
    user.password = hash;
    console.log(`hash`, hash)
  
    Users.add(user)
      .then(saved => {
        res.status(201).json(saved);
      })
      .catch(err => {
        res.status(500).json(err);
      }); -->

    } else {
        res.status(400).json({
            message: 'Invalid info about user',
        errors: validateResult.errors})
    }
  });
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
test logic should never fail.
so use jest to test function, to make sure always working correctly
create: users-helpers.test.js  // must end in test.js or spec.js will be executed by jest

npm i jest -D

add to package.json

"test": "jest --watch" // continuously watch

"jest": {"testEnvironment": "node"}

write code to test our code

---------------------------------------------
heroku deployment 

1. index.js  - need dynamic port 
const PORT = process.env.PORT

2. package.json
'scripts'
"start":"node index.js"

3. model
 .insert(proj, 'id')//include id or * to return id

 4. add on to use Postgres
 Resources/ add-ons / Postgres - HobbyDev-Free - provision

 in settings/ config vars 
  will appear DATABASE_URL ->  postgres

modify knexfile:
production: {
    client: "pg",
    connection: process.env.DATABASE_URL,
    pool: {
      min: 2,
      max: 10
    },
    migrations: {
      tableName: "./data/seeds"
    }
  }

5. data/ db_Config
const dbEnv = process.env.DB_ENV || 'development'

module.exports = knex(config[dbEnv])

6. Heroku - add - Config Vars
DB_ENV production

7. add migrations and seeds
npx heroku run knex migrate:latest -a landingbe

npx heroku run knex migrate:up 20191225204850_staging.js -a landingbe

npx heroku run knex seed:run -a landingbe


exports.seed = function(knex) {
  // Deletes ALL existing entries
  return knex('techInProject').del()
    .then(function () {
      // Inserts seed entries
      return knex('techInProject').insert([
        {project_id: 1, tech_id: 1},
        {project_id: 2, tech_id: 2},
        {project_id: 3, tech_id: 3}
      ]);
    });
};
